X - 1   2   3  4  5
Y - 5   7   9  11  13

Lets assume X is a Feature and Y is the Outcome

Here Y is called the dependent variable because it is dependent on X , where as X is an independent variable

It we plot this in a graph , we get a linear line , and it's also clear that if X increases then Y also increases

The general equation of a linear line / straight line is Y = mx+c

where m is the slope and c is the intercept

Let's take two point p1(2,7) and p2(3,9)

so slope(m) = y2 - y1 / x2 -x1  = 9 - 7 / 3 - 2 = 2

as we got the slope we can introduce this to our formula to get the intercept

We already know the target is 15 when the future is 5 , now lets check it with our obtained slope

13 = 2(5) + C

C = 3
For this particular line the slope is 2 and intercept is 3

So now what is slope ?

In simple words for a change in value of X axis there is also a change in Y axis , in our case for a change of 1 unit in the X axis , there are 2  units of  change in the Y axis


what is intercept ?

Distance of our initial line from the origin . In our case its 3

Lets now understand how we implement this in our code

regressor = LinearRegression()

regressor.fit(X_train,y_train)

# we are fitting the x _axis and y_axis values once we do this we get a relation for these points and then if we give new data it predicts as of this relation


So in short a Machine learning Model is a Function that tries to find a relationship between the Features and the target variable.

It tries to find the pattern in the data understand the data and trains the data. Based on this learning it makes new predictions and recognize the patterns.

But here in our case there is a linear relationship , but this doesn't happen all the time there might be unusual curve and we can go with the polynomial model , example Logistic Regression , SVM and K-means clustering

In supervised learning the machine learning algorithm learns from the labelled data set.

What is a labelled dataset ?

A labelled dataset is a dataset in which each data point has both input data and an associated correct output(label)

We will also come across two types of supervised learning algorithms. They are Classification and Regression

Classification ? What type is this  ----> Male / Female , Spam / ham

Classification Model's - Logistic Regression , SVM , Decision Tree , K-Nearest Neighbour , Random Forest , Naive Bayes Classification

Regression ----> How much ? or How many ? -- Temperature , Rate of a house.

Regression Models - Linear regression , Lasso regression , Polynomial regression , Support Vector Machine , Random Forest , Bayesian Linear Regressor.

An unsupervised learning algorithm is a type of machine learning method that finds patterns in data without using labelled outputs.

Unlike supervised learning, it doesn’t know the “correct answers” (no labels).

It tries to discover structure in the data on its own.

We just give a dataset without output and it tries to group , summarize and organize data without any labels.

Common Task in Unsupervised Learning :
Task                                   Description                              Example
Clustering	                      Group similar data points together	    Segmenting customers into groups
Dimensionality Reduction	      Simplify data by reducing features	    Visualizing high-dimensional data
Association	                      Find rules or patterns between features   "People who buy X also buy Y"


Unsupervised Algorithm models : K-Means,  Hierarchical Clustering, PCA (Principal Component Analysis), Apriori / Eclat

When to choose which Model ?

1. Types of data

     Images and Videos - CNN  - Convolutional Neural Networks

     Text data and speech data - RNN - Recurrent Neural Network

     Numerical data  - SVM , logistic regression, Decision trees

2. Based on task

    Classification tasks (this or that?) - SVM , Logistic regression , Decision trees , etc.

    Regression task (how much ?) - Linear regression , Random Forest , Polynomial regression

    Clustering Tasks(Grouping ) : K -means clustering , Hierarchical clustering
